As you can see, Boruto, in
general you're performing
exceptionally!
[chuckles]
[clearing throat]
Although, I have noticed that
you sometimes don't take class
time seriously enough.
Aw, come on! Give me a break,
would ya?
[sighs] I can't believe you!
All the same, I doubt that
doing so will much affect your
future prospects.
[chuckles]
So, Boruto, tell me, what kind
of ninja do you want to
become?
Uh, what kind?
That's right. Exactly what do
you want to do? What do you want
to focus on after graduation?
Uh, hmm.
To be completely honest with
you, Shino Sensei, when I think
about it...
there isn't really anything in
particular that I want to do as
a ninja.
What?! But, you're saying that
right now?!
You know the graduation exam's
coming up, don't you?
He's right, Boruto!
Hmm.
Eh, it doesn't matter.
The whole reason I entered the
Academy was only to get Dad all
riled up. After that...
What? It doesn't matter?
Look, I'll just make something
happen. I'm "exceptional." Isn't
that what you called me?
I'm sure I'll be able to
breeze through the graduation
exam, too.
[sighs] Right.
[sighs]
(Anko) Thanks for your hard work
on today's conferences!
Anko Sensei.
You know, you're looking kind
of exhausted.
Hmm. Students these days are,
how do I put this?
They're not giving much
thought to why they want to
become ninja.
Let me guess, topping that
list is the problem
child‐genius Boruto, right?
Yeah.
He's definitely got true talent.
But there are some barriers that
skill alone cannot overcome.
(Shino) One of them being the
graduation exam.
[laughing]
No, but seriously, you guys,
I'm telling you, my mom was
being such a drag!
Seems like you had a tough
time in there!
So how was your conference,
Denki?
Good! My Dad was super happy to
finally hear me say...
that I'm really planning on
becoming a shinobi!
Oh yeah?
I'm excited to graduate so I
can lose my nickname of "The
Repeater!"
I vow to become a shinobi like
Lord Hokage.
Cool! I'm sure that you can do
it, Iwabe!
Yeah.
But is becoming a shinobi
really that big a deal?
Yeah, of course it is! Being a
famous shinobi is almost the
same as being a national hero!
You'll even get offers to be
in commercials!
(Denki) See?
Just like Kagemasa. A whole
lot of shinobi act in movies
and TV after they retire.
Aren't you excited about it,
Boruto?
Oh, uh.
Well, I...
I don't.
Sorry, but I'm not really
interested in all of that
stuff.
I mean, is becoming a shinobi
actually something to get all
worked up about?
[speechless]
What?! Seriously?!
You're the one who inspired me
to study the Ninjutsu!
Why don't you feel as excited as
me?!
I don't know what to tell you,
Denki.
Boruto says all that but he
still gets the best grades. So
unfair.
That's for sure! Unfair!
Well, talking about the future
is nice and all.
But we've got the graduation
exam closing in on us really
fast.
Yeah, it sure is.
And there are two parts, right?
The written exam and the
practical application exam?
[groans] I sure am dreading
those.
Oh yeah, the written exam's
like a normal test, right?
(Boruto) But what's the
practical application about?
(Denki) It tests your skills.
(Iwabe) One time when I failed,
it was on wall climbing.
If I hadn't failed the written
exam, then I would've cleared
the whole thing, no problem.
I heard that back in the day,
you passed if you could do the
Clone or Transformation Jutsu.
Transformation Jutsu?
(Boruto) It would be easy if
that's all you had to do.
[groans]
[nervous giggle] By the way,
who are the proctors for the
exams gonna be?
It's gotta be Shino Sensei and
Anko Sensei, don't you think?
Eh, I'm sure it'll be easy
whoever it is!
I wouldn't be so confident.
Depending on the proctor, half
or even none of the class
could become genin.
Yep. I've heard that kind of
thing has happened before.
What?! Sometimes the whole
class can fail?!
[groans] Then I guess that
means...
We won't really know much of
anything until the test is
underway.
(Boruto) If that's true, are we
all gonna get scattered and go
our separate ways?
Graduation exam, and becoming
genin...uh?
(Sukea) Hey, you're a student
here, aren't you?
Who are you, old man?
Old man? Kinda harsh! My
name's Sukea. I'm a freelance
reporter.
Oh. Do you mean like a
journalist?
Yep!
I'm here to do a story on the
Academy students preparing to
take the graduation exam.
I want to hear everything! How
energized they are, what their
dreams for the future are.
Oh, yeah? A story? That sounds
really interesting. I'd be glad
to help you out, if you want!
(Sukea) Oh?
Come this way! I'll gather up
some guys who're still on
campus.
Actually, the person that I
had hoped to interview first
is you. But, that's okay.
[grunts]
(Sukea) So why do you want to be
a ninja?
For the obvious reason.
So I can become a strong man
like my papa! I want to see how
far I can go!
[gasps] Wait, are you recording
this right now?! Uh, in that
case, I'm Metal Lee!
It's nice to meet you! Um, my
dreams are to, um...
Hmm, I'll get to draw stuff I
like and make more money than
an ordinary artist would.
So I guess I'll be putting my
hobby to practical use.
Well, it's a drag, but to live
up to my parent's expectations.
And also, it's because I really
wouldn't mind being a ninja!
My goal is to become the
Hokage one day.
And to do that, I first have to
become a worthy shinobi.
One who's acknowledged by
everyone in the village.
Was that okay?
[gasps]
I, um...hmm.
I want to become a
ninja!
Actually, I don't plan on
becoming a ninja at all.
After graduation I'm going
home to run the family temple.
I'm going on to take
intermediate courses...
in the general middle school
curriculum. When our class had
career week...
I realized that being a ninja
wasn't the only job I had fun
doing.
[chewing]
Huh? Are you recording right
now?
Isn't the camera too far to
the right?
Here, come closer!
Yeah! That's the best angle!
[grunts] Hey, what are you
recording?!
Well all right, then.
After listening to everyone,
I'll say your class is full of
strong personalities!
Hmm.
Hmm? What is it?
It's nothing.
I was just thinking how
everyone's got some pretty solid
ideas...
about what their future
should be.
And some students don't even
intend to become ninja.
Yeah.
It's funny though. I just
assumed that everyone would
want to become a ninja.
You know, come to think of it,
why did you want to enter the
Academy?
Oh, I... I only wanted to get
back at my stupid old man.
Really now? And the Academy's
the only place you could do
that?
Yeah, that's why I followed
the same path he did.
Because if I was able to do
everything better than him...
I figured everyone would
finally see that I am better.
Hmm.
Look, I've got to get going
now, ya know!
But I can help out with more
interviews tomorrow!
See you later, Mr. Sukea!
Boruto, it's time for you to
finish up your game.
(Boruto) Okay.
Here!
Hey, Mom? What was it that
made you decide to become a
ninja?
Huh? [chuckles]
It was different back when I
was a child.
Becoming a ninja was just
something that was expected of
me.
(Hinata) And not just me, but
your late Uncle Neji as well.
If you were born a Hyuga, then
you were destined to become a
shinobi.
Really? Wow, that sounds
pretty rough, mom.
That's not all. Your grandfather
was very strict back in those
days.
Seriously?! Our grandpa?!
Come here, you! I'm so glad to
see you, Boruto!
I really can't picture him
being like that.
[chuckles] Well, time has
brought many changes, that's
for sure!
(Hinata) Today, becoming a
shinobi isn't everything.
[giggles]
I was surprised during your
conference today.
But still, if you decide you
don't want to become a shinobi,
I think it'd be fine, too.
Really, mom?!
Both your father and I, want
you to be able to choose your
own path in life.
[doubtful groan]
You say that but Dad might not
feel the same way.
What does he know about who I am
and what I want?
(Boruto) He didn't come home
again today, either.
[yawns]
(Wasabi) Why, Namida?!
Hmm?
I thought that we were gonna
become ninja together!
Wasabi, I... I'm sorry, but,
it's just...
What's going on with those
two?
Namida's planning to continue
on in the general middle
school curriculum.
Huh? You mean she's gonna give
up on becoming a ninja?
Yeah.
Together with her parents...
she's planning on telling Shino
Sensei during their
parent‐teacher conference today.
I guess that's one kinda path
someone can take.
Oh, I understand. That's how
it is.
But if she was gonna quit
anyway, why'd she even enter the
Academy in the first place?
I just don't get it.
Well, it's not out of the
ordinary to do so.
Even just completing the
ninjutsu course...
can be advantageous when looking
for a job.
Huh? Really?
You've been attending the
Academy, and you aren't even
aware of that?
[uncomfortable chuckle]
Graduating from the program
certifies that you're
talented.
That could really help you out
in the future. The demand for
shinobi's gone down.
That tends to happens during
times of peace.
Utilizing skills gained at the
Academy in fields other than
being a ninja is more secure.
And less risky, right?
Yeah, that's for sure.
(Boruto) I've seen former ninja
working in all sorts of jobs,
all over the village.
I've found that people who
have a reason to become a
shinobi don't give up.
No matter how small their
chances are for success, they
keep going.
They don't give up because
they all have a reason, huh?
My goal is to become the
Hokage one day.
Hmm.
(Mitsuki) Oh!
So this is where you are,
Boruto.
Oh, Mitsuki! Your timing's
perfect!
Do you think you could you
answer some questions for Mr.
Sukea's story?
Sorry, but I can't. My
conference is about to start.
Maybe later.
Come to think of it, I've
never seen his parents before.
I wonder what they're like?
Hey, Mr. Sukea!
How would you like to go and
crash a parent‐teacher
conference with me?
Let's not.
I don't think that's a good
idea.
Huh? Why not?
Let's just call it a
journalist's hunch, okay?
[chuckles]
By all rights someone like me
shouldn't be invited here.
It's hard to imagine I'm
allowed in such a special room.
I'm surprised that you're so
trusting.
You shouldn't be. Because
frankly, I don't trust you all
that much.
Well, a lot of stuff has
happened in the past.
But today, our relationship is
one of cooperation.
That is true, and you did
accept my dear child for
enrollment in the Academy.
There are still only a few of
us who know about that.
And most of the people who are
aware of our relationship
are right here.
You've been doing your part.
Your analysis of Danzo's
research has been a huge help.
(Naruto) It'll help speed up
Sasuke's investigation.
[chuckles] I sowed the seeds
and now must clean it up,
that's all.
There's no need to thank me
for it.
All the same, I'm honored if
my work's helpful to Sasuke.
But now, seems it's almost
time.
[grunts] You seriously intend to
go?
[chuckles] Why, yes. Of course.
[chuckles]
Well then, we wouldn't want to
get in your way or hold you up
any longer.
Hey, you should know this
already.
But if you're going to go out
in town, make sure you
disguise your face.
Naturally. [chuckles]
I'm certain that quite a lot of
people...
would be absolutely
shocked if they saw me out and
about.
Uh.
Hmm.
[about to cry]
[sighs]
(Boruto) Hey, what are you up
to?
Oh, Boruto. It's just you,
huh?
"It's just you?" That's kinda
harsh.
You're the big honor student.
If you're as worried as you
seem to be, why don't you just
go talk to her, huh?
It's really easy for you to
say that.
(Sarada) I mean...
I'm pretty sure that Namida
really wants to become a shinobi
along with Wasabi.
But still, she's dealing with
some family stuff right now.
And it really isn't my place
to say anything to her.
[annoyed sigh] Come on, what
are you even talking about?!
You said you wanna be Hokage,
right?
[gasps] Why would you bring
that up?!
Some Hokage you're gonna end
up being...
if you're too scared to stick
your neck out for something like
this.
[gasps]
Listen, maybe it's okay if you
let yourself be a little less
tactful.
I mean, because otherwise,
you're never gonna surpass my
stupid dad.
Boruto.
Hmph.
Thank you.
Oh, man. [chuckles] What a
pain.
I'm so happy! [giggles]
Yeah, I know! Me, too, Wasabi!
I'm happy, too. For you both!
This means...
What's up?
It seems Namida wanted to
continue toward being a ninja
but thought she couldn't.
And Sarada was able to coax
out her true feelings and set
everything right.
Really? Sarada did that?
I really think that I would've
dropped out!
[chuckles]
All of them went and talked to
Shino Sensei and he was able to
get Namida's parents to approve.
Yeah, Shino Sensei really is
reliable in situations like
these.
Let's become great ninja!
Yeah!
Thanks for all the help that
you gave me!
Sure thing! It wasn't a
problem at all!
Plus, I got to hear everyone's
stories, and that was great.
Oh? Everyone's stories?
That's right. And, 'cause of
that, I realized everyone's
got their own ambitions.
So anyway, you gonna cover the
graduation exam, too?
I believe I will.
Maybe we'll meet again when
they finally arrive.
Oh, yeah. By the way.
I'd like to give you a bit of
advice as your senior in life.
Hm?
There may be times when you walk
down a path...
without really knowing where you
want to end up.
It's not actually bad to have a
grace period like that.
However, if that's all you end
up doing...
you'll run into barriers you
won't be able to break. Remember
that.
Huh? I don't really understand
what you're saying.
Well, anyway, it may not always
look like it, but I've gotten
things to work out up to now.
I'm sure I'm gonna end up being
just fine!
See ya!
And watch, I'll pass the exam
with top scores! Make sure you
give me a good write‐up, kay?
Up to now.
Why do I want to become a
shinobi?
Going home now, Boruto?
Hey, Mitsuki. I could ask you
the same. What've you been
doing all this time?
After we had our conference, my
parent and I talked a bit since
we rarely see each other.
Your "parent?"
Anyways, what're your plans
after graduation?
Well, I could go back to the
Hidden Sound Village.
But I'm going to stay right
here, and become a ninja.
I told my parent I wanted to
stay, and they consented.
Oh, yeah? And is there a
reason why you want to do
that?
Yes. You.
[shocked]
I want to continue to observe
you.
Hmm.
You're not aware of how you
affect others.
You may not realize it, but your
actions have really changed
people.
Is that so?
Like Denki and Iwabe, and the
Class Rep too.
(Mitsuki) And without you...
I might not have been able to
speak up about what I want to
do, either.
You see, I too am among the
people whom you've influenced.
I kinda don't get what you're
saying, but I'm glad it all
worked out for you.
You're the only one without a
clear path, Boruto. Does that
worry you?
What's that?! I'm the only
one?!
[sighs]
I guess you're right. And I'd
only be lying if I said it
didn't bother me.
But, still.
Hm?
Really all I want to do is
hang out with everybody, to
stay together.
All right, then!
If I don't know what the answer
is yet, I'll become a ninja and
then figure it out!
I mean, that's kind of a path,
right?
I think that I get it. Well,
that's certainly one way of
looking at things.
(Boruto) And besides, right now
I've been having so much fun
with everybody, you know?
And so, I'm gonna become a
ninja...
so I can keep on having fun with
everyone for a little while
longer.
That's the plan for now and
that's enough!
[chuckles]
(Mitsuki) I see. That's so like
you!
[sighs] Are you serious? Why
did you have to go and do
something like that?
What's the big deal? I just
wanted to meet and talk to the
students...
before the graduation exam and
verify a few things, that's all.
Ah, ahh, mhm, ahh.
[sighs] Gathering intel's a
fundamental duty for a
shinobi.
And besides, I was curious.
No matter what, you never seem
to change, Lord Sixth.
Your supervising the graduation
exam is going to be a big help.
So thank you for volunteering to
do that.
But please, try not to be too
hard on them, all right?
I know. I got it.
But even if these are peaceful
times...
we can't have kids passing who
don't take becoming a shinobi
seriously.
(Kakashi) Now, I have to wonder
how many of them will still be
standing at the end.
Since my exams can be a bit,
shall we say, challenging?
(Boruto) We gotta go up against
Shino Sensei and the others?!
This'll be a piece of cake!
(Shikadai) We've fought them
before, so we know their moves.
(Boruto) This test isn't a big
deal!
Let's just wrap this up so we
can get on with becoming ninja,
together!
(Kakashi) I'm not holding back,
either. So come at me with the
intent to kill.
(Boruto) Old Man Kakashi?!
Next time on Boruto Naruto
Next Generations: "The
Graduation Exam Begins!"
(Kakashi) All right, you guys.
Show us how strong your resolve
is.